---
title: 'The Illusion of Change'
description: 'Kristaps Porzingis has changed teams, roles, and skills for nearly a decade — and stayed the exact same caliber of player. A study of basketball''s ultimate stagnation.'
author: 'AM'
pubDate: 'Jul 02 2026'
heroImage: '/images/illusion-of-change.jpg'
---

The NBA is most definitely a league of restlessness, defined by consistent change. Every year, some players get better while others get worse. Amidst all this development and regression, there are even some players who simply don't change, filling the same role for years on end, for better or worse. However, there is something that, in a way, is even more saddening than a major regression. That state is something that I like to call, "The Illusion of Change", referring to the constant adaptation and development of new skills that ultimately leads to little to no increase or decrease in production. The ultimate form of stagnation, despite making every effort to rebrand yourself into something new and improved. There are many players who are in this state for a couple years. However, there is one who has been in this state for nearly a decade. The Illusion of Change relates to no other player better than it relates to Kristaps Porzingis.

Kristaps' career started in 2015, when he was drafted 4th overall to an aging Knicks team headlined by an aging Carmelo Anthony and really nothing else. He was seen as a development guy, with scouts especially zealous over his beautiful shooting mechanics in his 7'3 frame. Given that he was a relatively unknown prospect coming over from Latvia, his selection was infamously met with a lot of criticism from Knicks fans. However, Porzingis did not disappoint in New York. He finished second in Rookie of the Year voting and established himself as the new face of the Knicks franchise following the decline of Carmelo. Over the next couple years, he would gain more experience and continue to rapidly improve, developing from a raw, intriguing prospect with sky-high upside into one of the league's best young players and a legitimate All-Star at just 22 years old. By the 2017-2018 season, he had developed a few standout traits that led to his success. The outside shot was exactly what scouts had desired. He had a quick release for his size, with an absurdly high release point that made him virtually uncontestable. He paired this with the range to consistently pull from multiple feet behind the 3 point line, shooting an impressive 39.7% on 3.8 attempts per game from 25-29 feet out. He paired this shooting with a strong enough handle to attack closeouts. Due to his size, he lacked a tight enough handle to dribble through traffic or any go to moves, but was a strong straight-line driver against closeouts in the half court, and especially brilliant at pushing the ball in transition. This tied into the most overlooked part of his game in New York, the fact that he moved with unmatched fluidity for someone of his stature. He possessed mobility at his size that, to this day, is only rivaled by the alien himself, Victor Wembanyama. He was not only massive, but quicker than nearly any other 7-footer. This not only helped him offensively, but defensively as well, as he could cover insane amounts of ground and affect an absurdly large radius of shots. In 2017-18, opponents shot 10.8% worse on shots less than 6 feet away from the rim when Kristaps Porzingis was contesting, a mark that was second best among players with 5 or more shots of this criteria taken against them per game. Along with this, he averaged 3.7 blocks per 100 possessions in 2017-18, with a 6.4% block percentage that was highest in the league. However, Porzingis also had his weaknesses. He wasn't a strong finisher, lacking the touch or power to finish at the rim consistently. He also lacked a post game. Due to this, he only shot 52.0% at the rim in 2017-18. On the other side of the ball, he wasn't sound defensively, and often was caught out of position. Throughout this era, he was also notoriously unassertive on the glass, a lackluster rebounder for his size who had virtually zero impact on on/off team rebound percentage. On February 6, 2018, Porzingis would tear his ACL against the Bucks, and, although we didn't know it yet, this would mark his last game with the Knicks.

Mavs fans would have to anxiously wait for Kristaps' debut, as he would miss the entirety of the 2018-19 season recovering from his ACL tear. He would make his heavily anticipated comeback at just 24 years old, in the Mavs' first game of the 2019-20 season, where they hosted the Wizards. Throughout the season, it was made clear that the trade to Dallas marked not only the first major change in his career, but also the first major change in his playstyle. He became more of a spot-up shooter than he previously was, as he lacked a lot of the mobility that he had before, and resultantly didn't attack off the dribble nearly as much. Kristaps' 3-Point Attempt Rate rose from 25.6% to 43.2%. This can also be attributed to the heliocentric offense around Luka, as well as Rick Carlisle's coaching. In addition to this, Porzingis was worse defensively after making the switch from power forward to center. Across the entirety of his Dallas tenure, Kristaps' defensive rating rose to +2.1, a travesty compared to his 2017-18 mark of -7.2. These weaknesses would culminate in the Mavs' first round series against the Clippers, and Kristaps' tumultuous relationship with head coach Rick Carlisle would reach its boiling point, a level of animosity that it would never descend from.

However, not much would change in the next 2 frustrating and injury-riddled years. At the 2022 trade deadline, his turbulent stint in Dallas would finally come to an end. Porzingis would be traded to Washington for a far-from-appealing package of Spencer Dinwiddie and Davis Bertans, initiating the next phase of his still relatively young career. He would go on to play his first game in Washington at 26 years old, and would play 16 more to end the 2021-22 season. In the 2022-23 season, we would see Porzingis gradually shift his playstyle once again. He began to develop a real interior game that he had previously lacked. His finishing vastly improved, now shooting an impressive 68% at the rim. More notably, he developed a post game reliant on a variety of turnaround and touch shots from 6-10 feet out, a range from which he made 52% of his shot attempts. While this part of his offensive game wasn't refined enough to make him a true post-scoring threat, it was more than viable enough for him to attack switches from guards or wings, an ability that he did not have before. This new dynamic to his game allowed him to have the most efficient season of his career up to this point, boasting a true shooting percentage of 62.7%. Simultaneously, he began to re-emerge as the impactful rim protector that he had once been, cleaning up many of the mental flaws that he had as an inexperienced, budding star in New York. While Porzingis had what was arguably the best individual season of his career, the Wizards would finish with a 35-47 record, missing the play-in completely. However, in the 2023 offseason, Porzingis' career would take yet another wild turn, as he would be traded to the Boston Celtics, a team that was just 1 year removed from a finals appearance, and a month removed from a Game 7 in the Eastern Conference Finals, in a blockbuster three teamer.

The trade to Boston would give Kristaps his first opportunity to play for a true contender, and Joe Mazzulla's 3-Point-Centric system would turn him into a new, more versatile kind of scorer. His game was now more complete, yet more simple than ever. His usage rate dropped to its lowest mark since 2016-17, while his 3-Point Attempt Rate reached its highest mark since 2019-20. Despite the increase in 3-Point attempts, he also developed his post game even more, which, combined with his ability to stretch the floor, made him a crucial weapon in both the Celtics' half-court and transition offense, as a sort of Swiss army knife that could attack mismatches in various ways. Porzingis would only play in 7 games throughout the entirety of the playoffs, but his offensive versatility would come up huge in Game 1 of the NBA Finals, amidst the Celtics' road to an NBA championship. At this point, just months before Porzingis' 29th birthday, it seemed as if he had finally found where he fits among the league's stars. However, the NBA is most definitely a league of restlessness. In the 2024-25 regular season, one that was once again plagued by injury, Porzingis would maintain both an identical role and play style (although his 3-Point Attempt Rate would reach the highest mark of his career). However, come playoff time, he would face yet another major setback in a career that had seemingly been defined by them. After a poor showing against the Magic in the first round, Porzingis would face the Knicks in the second round, where, to say the least, he did not look like himself. Porzingis would average just 15.5 minutes per game, where he was clearly playing under what was described as "a mysterious illness" (later diagnosed as Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome). Unfortunately, this lackluster collection of games would mark Porzingis' last games in Boston.

In the 2025 offseason, Porzingis would be traded to Atlanta in what was essentially a salary dump. Injuries would continue to haunt Kristaps throughout the 2025-26 season, as he would only play in 17 of Atlanta's first 53 games, averaging 17.1 PPG on respectable efficiency, but not looking like the impactful two-way star that he had shown to be over most of his tenure in green and white. At the deadline, Porzingis would be shipped to the Warriors in a package centered around Jonathan Kuminga. In his 15 games in Golden State, aside from a few stellar performances in March, little changed, aside from yet another drop in efficiency. As of writing this, Porzingis has recently been extended by Golden State on a 2-year deal worth $40 million, keeping him a Warrior through the 2027-28 season. At this point, his best days are clearly behind him, but his future does not seem so bleak. We saw what he was capable of last time he was healthy with some sense of continuity. With that being said, it's hard not to address the unsettling nature of the tumultuous career of Kristaps Porzingis, one that few careers could display to this extent.

Porzingis' career is the ultimate victim of the Illusion of Change. He came into the league as a unicorn. A freakishly tall, lanky sharpshooter who was more mobile than anyone his size. He quickly developed into a budding young star, netting him his first, and shockingly only, All-Star appearance in the 2017-18 season. One ACL tear, and a trade to the Mavericks' heliocentric offense later, he saw himself as little more than a jumbo-sized stretch 5, lacking the raw, yet impressive defensive prowess that he had previously possessed. After getting dumped in D.C., he developed a real interior game and became more fundamentally sound on the other side of the ball. In Boston, he doubled down on these new skills, peaking as a versatile offensive weapon en route to an NBA Championship. An injury-riddled stint in Atlanta saw him in a lesser role with no continuity to build off of, leading to a trade to The Bay where we saw flashes of the Championship-Winning Kristaps that are yet to materialize into anything. Despite all of these changes in team, role, and play style, as well as all of the new skills developed, Porzingis has stayed around the same caliber of player. He never reached the levels of superstardom that NBA fans anticipated in 2018. Meanwhile, he never hit the lows that would make fans question the value he brings. He simply just stagnated… while constantly changing and developing. This is the Illusion of Change. An illusion that is potent enough to be a product of Mysterio, but is rather a product of the combination of ever-changing roles and a seemingly endless chain of injuries that leads to a lack of any meaningful continuity. The illusion isn't the lack of change, but rather the idea that change guarantees a different outcome. Porzingis constantly changed as a player, but, unfortunately, the outcome has always remained stagnant.

Thanks for reading,

AM
